How important is the use of illustrations?
Are they simply fluff in our teaching?
One definition of the English word “fluff”
is this:
“something essentially trivial
and lacking importance or solid worth.”
Are illustrations trivial
and of little worth?
Please follow along on-screen
as I read our theme scripture,
Matthew 13:34:
“All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds
“by illustrations.
“Indeed, without an illustration
he would not speak to them.”
We often call Jesus the Great Teacher.
Illustrations were essential
to fully grasp what was being taught.
Now, we won’t be spending a lot of time
on the dos and don’ts of using illustrations.
Insight on the Scriptures
has a whole topic on “Illustrations.”
And the Apply Yourself
to Reading and Teaching  brochure
has some helpful suggestions in lesson 8.
Let me remind you, also,
of a talk that Brother Splane
of the Governing Body gave
at the 2020 regional convention.
The title was “Improve Your Skills
—Illustrating Key Points.”
It had some very practical suggestions,
which I won’t be repeating here,
so perhaps you’ll want
to review Brother Splane’s talk
in an upcoming family worship.
At times, the Bible
actually identifies Jesus’ expression
as an illustration;
most of the time,
it does not.
It was just part of the way
he spoke naturally;
illustrations flowed from him.
Well, how did he come up with them
so readily?
Jesus was observant
of what was happening around him.
We too can be observant.
This will help to train us
to think in illustrations.
The bread and the wine used
at the Memorial of Christ’s death
beautifully represented
Jesus’ perfect body and blood
that would be given
in behalf of sinful mankind.
But we can learn something
about our use of illustrations
by considering the circumstances
of the Lord’s Evening Meal.
Think about it:
From years of attending,
Jesus knew what was going to be
on the Passover table that night.
So he could’ve thought in advance
of using those emblems in that way.
We don’t know for sure.
But what a simple, logical,
and indelible impression it made that night
and continues to make on millions of us
some 2,000 years later!
If we’re going to give
a talk or demonstration
at one of our meetings,
we already know the topic.
So we have the luxury of thinking
of an illustration in advance.
But what if we’re teaching a Bible student
and he asks us an unexpected question?
At that moment,
you’ll likely mentally consider your student
—what you know about his work, his hobbies,
or just his daily life experiences—
and an illustration may come to your mind
on the spur of the moment.
Well, let’s see how that latter process
(an unexpected situation)
was faced by Jesus.
In this case,
we can understand his thought process
in coming up with masterful illustrations.
John chapter 4 is the account
about the Samaritan woman at the well.
At John 4:34,
Jesus used the illustration of food.
He said there:
“My food is to do the will of him who sent me
and to finish his work.”
That’s a simple, effective illustration.
Why might he have used
the generic expression “food”
instead of something more specific
like “my wine” or “my bread
is to do the will of him who sent me”?
Well, let’s look at the context.
Interestingly, in quick succession,
Jesus used two different illustrations.
And in both cases,
it seems from the context
that he came up with these
based on what was happening at the time.
John 4:7 says:
“A woman of Samaria came to draw water.
Jesus said to her: ‘Give me a drink.’”
Well, that’s setup number one
for an illustration about water.
Verse 8 says:
“For his disciples had gone off
into the city to buy food.”
That’s setup number two
for an illustration about food.
Now, Jesus didn’t orchestrate all of this
in advance.
It was just circumstantial
that Jesus asked a woman
who approached with a water jar
to give him a drink.
But Jesus instantly thought of and used
the subject of water as an illustration.
Verse 10 says:
“If you had known of the free gift of God
“and who it is who says to you,
“‘Give me a drink,’
“you would have asked him,
and he would have given you living water.”
The illustration was spontaneous.
It effectively led
to a fine witness about Jesus.
Now, in illustration number two,
look in verse 27.
Jesus is still talking to the woman
when the disciples return from the city.
Do you remember that verse 8 said
the disciples had gone
“into the city to buy food”?
So they come back,
and they have some food for Jesus.
Going to verse 28, the woman leaves.
Notice what the disciples now say to Jesus,
which is a setup for illustration number two
—not water, but food now becomes
the topic of conversation.
Verse 31:
“Meanwhile, the disciples were urging him:
‘Rabbi, eat.’”
The word “eat” caused Jesus
to think of the now famous illustration
that we quote regularly.
Verse 32:
“But he said to them:
“‘I have food to eat
that you do not know about.’”
Well, the disciples are puzzled.
Verse 33:
“So the disciples said to one another:
“‘No one brought him anything to eat, did he?’
“Jesus [picking up on the topic at hand]
said to them:
“‘My food
is to do the will of him who sent me
and to finish his work.’”
Now obviously,
Jesus did not choreograph
all this in advance.
But based on the circumstances at hand,
he came up with illustrations that worked.
Well, in what way?
Well, what’s the point of similarity
between God’s will and food?
Eating good food is enjoyable.
It’s satisfying!
The point?
Jesus enjoyed doing God’s will.
It was satisfying to him
—like eating a tasty meal.
Another point of similarity
is that food invigorates a person.
Jesus was invigorated
by that conversation
with the Samaritan woman.
Now glance back up in verses 3-6.
It says that Jesus had “left Judea” on foot.
Look in verse 6:
“Now Jesus,
“tired out as he was from the journey,
“was sitting at the well.
It was about the sixth hour.”
However,
after witnessing to the woman at the well,
Jesus is invigorated.
He even alluded to the idea
that the experience
was more energizing than literal food.
What have we learned thus far
from the process?
If you know beforehand
what will be discussed,
that gives you the opportunity
to think of an appropriate illustration
in advance.
If something comes up unexpectedly,
often you can use
what you’ve observed around you
or what you already know
to generate an effective illustration.
You might be thinking:
‘Uh, I’m not really creative.
‘It takes a while
for me to think up an illustration,
‘even when I know in advance
that I have an assignment at the meeting.
‘On-the-spot illustrations?
‘It’s probably not going to happen for me
with the way my brain works
or doesn’t work.’
Is there a way to train the brain
to think in illustration mode?
Yes.
How?
One way is by observing creation
or man-made inventions,
even when you don’t have a talk to give
and even when your children
are not with you.
Think about what you observe,
and reason out how it could be applied
as a teaching lesson in the future.
Write it down if you need to
so as to remember it.
One father told me that even when
his children were not with him,
he would look at creation
and come up with a line of reasoning
that might be helpful in the future.
He gave an example.
He observed two kittens playing together.
He reasoned:
“Do those kittens look happy?
“Yes.
“If Jehovah knows what it takes
“to make two kittens happy,
“do you think he knows
what it would take to make you happy?”
Well, obviously, a child would agree.
“So if Jehovah knows what it would take
to make you happy,
what should you do if Jehovah says
to do something a certain way?”
Profound, Dad!
Do it Jehovah’s way
if you want to be happy.
Now the beautiful reality,
the golden moment,
was when he saw one of his sons
watching two squirrels
in a tree chasing each other.
He used the squirrels as his illustration,
along with the prepared line of reasoning.
Now his son still remembers that point
many decades later.
Jesus’ brain thought creatively
when using illustrations.
For another example,
please turn with me to John 1:42.
Jesus changed Simon’s name on the spot.
John 1:42:
“And he [Andrew] led him [Simon] to Jesus.
“When Jesus looked at him, he said:
“‘You are Simon, the son of John;
“you will be called Cephas’
(which is translated ‘Peter’).”
Now, why did Jesus change his name
to Cephas, or Peter?
It actually seems to be creative thinking.
The Greek word for Peter is Peˈtros,
not Peˈtra.
Peˈtra  means “Rock Mass,”
and that applies to Jesus, the cornerstone,
the head of the Christian congregation.
However, Peˈtros  means “A Piece of Rock.”
What a beautiful description of Peter!
At times, Peter didn’t seem to be dependable.
But Jesus saw good qualities in him
and gave him the name Peter
(Peˈtros, Piece of Rock).
In effect,
Jesus was saying
that he would become as stable as a rock.
And that’s precisely what transpired.
What a great word picture,
or illustration, by Jesus!
At Revelation 1:1,
under inspiration to John,
Jehovah said that that book of the Bible was
“a revelation by Jesus Christ,
which God gave him.”
The Insight  book says:
“The book of Revelation
concludes the Holy Scriptures
“with one
of the most outstanding concentrations
of illustrations found in the entire Bible.”
You recall our theme is from Matthew 13:34:
“Without an Illustration
He Would Not Speak to Them.”
As another example,
Jesus gave his famous Sermon on the Mount.
In Matthew chapter 7,
the last chapter of that sermon,
he used at least ten different illustrations.
Yes, “without an illustration
he would not speak to them.”
Matthew 7:28
sums up the Sermon on the Mount, saying:
“When Jesus finished these sayings,
“the effect was that the crowds were astounded
at his way of teaching.”
First Peter 2:21 says that Jesus left
“a model for [us]
to follow his steps closely.”
That includes his art of teaching,
which incorporated
extensive use of illustrations.
They were pithy and to the point.
May each of us train ourselves
to think that way
and strive to improve our teaching skills
by means of illustrations.